doc/source/examples/incompressible-flow/2d-transient-around-ahmed-body/2d-transient-around-ahmed-body.rst, before:

======================================
2D Transient flow around an Ahmed body
======================================

Features
---------

- Solver: ``gls_navier_stokes_2d`` (with Q1-Q1) 
- Transient problem
- Displays how to import and easily adapt a gmsh file

Location of the examples
-------------------------

- Parameter file: ``/examples/incompressible_flow/2d_ahmed_body/ahmed.prm``
- Geometry file: ``/examples/incompressible_flow/2d_ahmed_body/Ahmed_Body_20_2D.geo``
- Mesh file: ``/examples/incompressible_flow/2d_ahmed_body/Ahmed_Body_20_2D.geo``

Description of the case
--------------------------
In this example, a flow is passing across a fixed Ahmed body (simplified version of a car, classical benchmark for aerodynamic simulation tools). The velocity profile of the flow is simulated. The parameter file used is ``ahmed.prm``.

The following schematic describes the simulation.

.. image:: images/ahmed_bc.png
    :alt: The geometry and boundary conditions
    :align: center
    :name: geometry_and_bc


* bc = 0 (No slip boundary condition)
* bc = 1 (u = 1; flow in the x-direction)
* bc = 2 (Slip boundary condition)

The basic geometry for the Ahmed body is given below, as defined in Ahmed et al. [1], with all measures in mm.

.. image:: images/ahmed_geometry.png
    :alt: Geometry detailed description
    :align: center
    :name: geometry_detailed

Parameter file
--------------
First, we import the mesh like in the `Example 3 <https://lethe-cfd.github.io/lethe/examples/incompressible-flow/2d-flow-around-cylinder/2d-flow-around-cylinder.html>`_. 

Mesh
~~~~~
Geometry parameters can be adapted in the "Parameters" section of the ``.geo`` file, as shown below. Namely the step parameter ``phi`` can be easily adapted.

.. code-block:: text

    //===========================================================================
    //Parameters
    //===========================================================================
    unit = 1000; //length unit : 1 -> mm ; 1000 -> m
    phi = 20; //angle at rear, variable
    esf = 2.0e-1; //element size factor, used in the free quad mesh

    //Ahmed body basic geometry
    L = 1044/unit;
    H = 288/unit;
    R = 100/unit;
    Hw = 50/unit; //wheel height (height from the road)
    Ls = 222/unit; //slope length

    //Fluid domain
    xmin = -500/unit;
    ymin = -Hw;
    xmax = 2500/unit;
    ymax = 1000/unit;

The initial mesh is built with `Gmsh <https://gmsh.info/#Download>`_. It is defined as transfinite at the body boundary layer and between the body and the road, and free for the rest of the domain. The mesh is dynamically refined throughout the simulation.

Initial an boundary conditions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The initial condition and boundary conditions are defined as in `Example 3 <https://lethe-cfd.github.io/lethe/examples/incompressible-flow/2d-flow-around-cylinder/2d-flow-around-cylinder.html>`_.

.. code-block:: text

    subsection initial conditions
        set type = nodal
        subsection uvwp
            set Function expression = 1; 0; 0
        end
    end

    subsection boundary conditions
        set number                  = 3
        subsection bc 0
            set type              = noslip
        end
        subsection bc 1
            set type              = function
        subsection u
            set Function expression = 1
        end
        subsection v
            set Function expression = 0
        end
        subsection w
            set Function expression = 0
        end
    end
        subsection bc 2
            set type              = slip
        end
    end

Simulation control
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Time integration is defined by a 1st order backward differentiation (``bdf1``), for a 4 seconds simulation (``time end``) with a 0.01 second ``time step``. The ``output path`` is defined to save obtained results in a sub-directory, as stated in Simulation Control:

.. code-block:: text

    subsection simulation control
        set method                  = bdf1
        set output frequency        = 1
        set output name             = ahmed-output
        set output path             = ./Re720/
        set time end                = 4
        set time step		      = 0.01
    end


Ahmed body are typically studied considering a 60 m/s flow of air. Here, the flow speed is set to 1 (``u = 1``) so that the Reynolds number for the simulation (``Re = uL/ν``, with ``L`` the height of the Ahmed body) is varied through the kinematic viscosity ``ν``:

.. code-block:: text 

    subsection physical properties
        set kinematic viscosity         = 4e-4
    end

The input mesh ``Ahmed_Body_20_2D.msh`` is in the same folder as the ``.prm`` file and is called with:

.. code-block:: text

    subsection mesh
        set type                 = gmsh
        set file name            = Ahmed_Body_20_2D.msh
    end

The simulation is launched in the same folder as the ``.prm`` and ``.msh`` file, using the ``gls_navier_stokes_2d`` solver. To decrease simulation time, it is advised to run on multiple cpu, using ``mpirun``:

To do so, copy and paste the ``gls_navier_stokes_2d`` exacutable to the same folder as your ``.prm`` file and launch it running the following line:

.. code-block:: text

      mpirun -np 6 gls_navier_stokes_2d ahmed.prm

where here 6 is the number of cpu used. The estimated execution time for a 4 seconds simulation is 6 minutes and 53 seconds.

Alternatively, specify the path to the ``gls_navier_stokes_2d`` in your ``build/applications`` folder, as follows:

.. code-block:: text

      mpirun -np 6 ../build/applications/gls_navier_stokes_2d/gls_navier_stokes_2d ahmed.prm

Guidelines for parameters other than the previous mentioned are found at the `Parameters guide <https://lethe-cfd.github.io/lethe/parameters/parameters.html>`_.

Results
-------
Transient results are shown for three ``Re`` values:

+-------+-----------------+--------------------+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Re    | :math:`{\nu}`   | Video              | t = 0.5 s                             | t = 4 s                              |
+=======+=================+====================+=======================================+======================================+
| 28.8  | 1e-2            | |video_1_ahmed|_   | .. image:: images/Re28_speed_t05.png  | .. image:: images/Re28_speed_t4.png  |
+-------+-----------------+--------------------+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 288   | 1e-3            | |video_2_ahmed|_   | .. image:: images/Re288_speed_t05.png | .. image:: images/Re288_speed_t4.png |
+-------+-----------------+--------------------+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 720   | 4e-2            | |video_3_ahmed|_   | .. image:: images/Re720_speed_t05.png | .. image:: images/Re720_speed_t4.png |
+-------+-----------------+--------------------+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+

.. |video_1_ahmed| image:: images/video_1_ahmed.jfif 
.. _video_1_ahmed: http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=5iqMJ7O_AcU

.. |video_2_ahmed| image:: images/video_2_ahmed.jfif 
.. _video_2_ahmed: http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=22salV0Q8_0

.. |video_3_ahmed| image:: images/video_3_ahmed.jfif 
.. _video_3_ahmed: http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=SVReNMeDNiE

The mesh and processors load is adapted dynamically throughout the simulation, as shown below for ``Re = 720``.

+-------------+----------------------------------------+
| Time        | Image                                  |
+=============+========================================+
| t = 0 s     | .. image:: images/Re720_mesh_t0.png    |
+-------------+----------------------------------------+
| t = 0.05 s  | .. image:: images/Re720_mesh_t005.png  |
+-------------+----------------------------------------+
| t = 4 s     | .. image:: images/Re720_mesh_t4.png    |
+-------------+----------------------------------------+

Possibilities for extension
----------------------------

* Change the ``phi`` value to see the effect of the angle in the streamline.
* Vary the Reynolds number, or the initial and boundary conditions.
* Make a tridimentional mesh, or even add other features to it, such as sharpen the edges.
* Test higher order elements (e.g., Q2-Q1).

References
----------
[1] Ahmed, S. R., Ramm, G., & Faltin, G. (1984). Some salient features of the time-averaged ground vehicle wake. SAE Transactions, 473-503.

Commit message:

Fix the subsection physical properties and small text errors
Co-authored-by: Bruno Blais <blais.bruno@gmail.com>

doc/source/examples/incompressible-flow/2d-transient-around-ahmed-body/2d-transient-around-ahmed-body.rst, after:

======================================
2D Transient flow around an Ahmed body
======================================

Features
---------

- Solver: ``gls_navier_stokes_2d`` (with Q1-Q1) 
- Transient problem
- Displays how to import and easily adapt a gmsh file

Location of the examples
-------------------------

- Parameter file: ``/examples/incompressible_flow/2d_ahmed_body/ahmed.prm``
- Geometry file: ``/examples/incompressible_flow/2d_ahmed_body/Ahmed_Body_20_2D.geo``
- Mesh file: ``/examples/incompressible_flow/2d_ahmed_body/Ahmed_Body_20_2D.geo``

Description of the case
--------------------------
In this example, a flow is passing across a fixed Ahmed body (simplified version of a car, classical benchmark for aerodynamic simulation tools). The velocity profile of the flow is simulated. The parameter file used is ``ahmed.prm``.

The following schematic describes the simulation.

.. image:: images/ahmed_bc.png
    :alt: The geometry and boundary conditions
    :align: center
    :name: geometry_and_bc


* bc = 0 (No slip boundary condition)
* bc = 1 (u = 1; flow in the x-direction)
* bc = 2 (Slip boundary condition)

The basic geometry for the Ahmed body is given below, as defined in Ahmed et al. [1], with all measures in mm.

.. image:: images/ahmed_geometry.png
    :alt: Geometry detailed description
    :align: center
    :name: geometry_detailed

Parameter file
--------------
First, we import the mesh like in the `Example 3 <https://lethe-cfd.github.io/lethe/examples/incompressible-flow/2d-flow-around-cylinder/2d-flow-around-cylinder.html>`_. 

Mesh
~~~~~
Geometry parameters can be adapted in the "Parameters" section of the ``.geo`` file, as shown below. Namely the step parameter ``phi`` can be easily adapted.

.. code-block:: text

    //===========================================================================
    //Parameters
    //===========================================================================
    unit = 1000; //length unit : 1 -> mm ; 1000 -> m
    phi = 20; //angle at rear, variable
    esf = 2.0e-1; //element size factor, used in the free quad mesh

    //Ahmed body basic geometry
    L = 1044/unit;
    H = 288/unit;
    R = 100/unit;
    Hw = 50/unit; //wheel height (height from the road)
    Ls = 222/unit; //slope length

    //Fluid domain
    xmin = -500/unit;
    ymin = -Hw;
    xmax = 2500/unit;
    ymax = 1000/unit;

The initial mesh is built with `Gmsh <https://gmsh.info/#Download>`_. It is defined as transfinite at the body boundary layer and between the body and the road, and free for the rest of the domain. The mesh is dynamically refined throughout the simulation. This will be explained later in this example.

Initial an boundary conditions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The initial condition and boundary conditions are defined as in `Example 3 <https://lethe-cfd.github.io/lethe/examples/incompressible-flow/2d-flow-around-cylinder/2d-flow-around-cylinder.html>`_.

.. code-block:: text

    subsection initial conditions
        set type = nodal
        subsection uvwp
            set Function expression = 1; 0; 0
        end
    end

    subsection boundary conditions
        set number                  = 3
        subsection bc 0
            set type              = noslip
        end
        subsection bc 1
            set type              = function
        subsection u
            set Function expression = 1
        end
        subsection v
            set Function expression = 0
        end
        subsection w
            set Function expression = 0
        end
    end
        subsection bc 2
            set type              = slip
        end
    end

Simulation control
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Time integration is defined by a 1st order backward differentiation (``bdf1``), for a 4 seconds simulation (``time end``) with a 0.01 second ``time step``. The ``output path`` is defined to save obtained results in a sub-directory, as stated in Simulation Control:

.. code-block:: text

    subsection simulation control
        set method                  = bdf1
        set output frequency        = 1
        set output name             = ahmed-output
        set output path             = ./Re720/
        set time end                = 4
        set time step		      = 0.01
    end


.. Warning::
   To successfully launch the simualtion, the output path where the results are saved must already exist. Otherwise, the simulation will hang because it will be unable to save the results.

Ahmed body are typically studied considering a 60 m/s flow of air. Here, the flow speed is set to 1 (``u = 1``) so that the Reynolds number for the simulation (``Re = uL/ν``, with ``L`` the height of the Ahmed body) is varied  by changing the kinematic viscosity :math:`nu`:

.. code-block:: text 

    subsection physical properties
       subsection fluid 0
           set kinematic viscosity         = 4e-4
        end
    end

The input mesh ``Ahmed_Body_20_2D.msh`` is in the same folder as the ``.prm`` file. The mesh subsection is set to use this file.

.. code-block:: text

    subsection mesh
        set type                 = gmsh
        set file name            = Ahmed_Body_20_2D.msh
    end

The simulation is launched in the same folder as the ``.prm`` and ``.msh`` file, using the ``gls_navier_stokes_2d`` solver. To decrease simulation time, it is advised to run on multiple cpu, using ``mpirun``:

To do so, copy and paste the ``gls_navier_stokes_2d`` exacutable to the same folder as your ``.prm`` file and launch it running the following line:

.. code-block:: text

      mpirun -np 6 gls_navier_stokes_2d ahmed.prm

where here 6 is the number of cpu used. The estimated execution time for a 4 seconds simulation is 6 minutes and 53 seconds.

Alternatively, specify the path to the ``gls_navier_stokes_2d`` in your ``build/applications`` folder, as follows:

.. code-block:: text

      mpirun -np 6 ../build/applications/gls_navier_stokes_2d/gls_navier_stokes_2d ahmed.prm

Guidelines for parameters other than the previous mentioned are found at the `Parameters guide <https://lethe-cfd.github.io/lethe/parameters/parameters.html>`_.

Results
-------
Transient results are shown for three ``Re`` values:

+-------+-----------------+--------------------+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Re    | :math:`{\nu}`   | Video              | t = 0.5 s                             | t = 4 s                              |
+=======+=================+====================+=======================================+======================================+
| 28.8  | 1e-2            | |video_1_ahmed|_   | .. image:: images/Re28_speed_t05.png  | .. image:: images/Re28_speed_t4.png  |
+-------+-----------------+--------------------+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 288   | 1e-3            | |video_2_ahmed|_   | .. image:: images/Re288_speed_t05.png | .. image:: images/Re288_speed_t4.png |
+-------+-----------------+--------------------+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
| 720   | 4e-2            | |video_3_ahmed|_   | .. image:: images/Re720_speed_t05.png | .. image:: images/Re720_speed_t4.png |
+-------+-----------------+--------------------+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+

.. |video_1_ahmed| image:: images/video_1_ahmed.jfif 
.. _video_1_ahmed: http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=5iqMJ7O_AcU

.. |video_2_ahmed| image:: images/video_2_ahmed.jfif 
.. _video_2_ahmed: http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=22salV0Q8_0

.. |video_3_ahmed| image:: images/video_3_ahmed.jfif 
.. _video_3_ahmed: http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=SVReNMeDNiE

The mesh and processors load is adapted dynamically throughout the simulation, as shown below for ``Re = 720``.

+-------------+----------------------------------------+
| Time        | Image                                  |
+=============+========================================+
| t = 0 s     | .. image:: images/Re720_mesh_t0.png    |
+-------------+----------------------------------------+
| t = 0.05 s  | .. image:: images/Re720_mesh_t005.png  |
+-------------+----------------------------------------+
| t = 4 s     | .. image:: images/Re720_mesh_t4.png    |
+-------------+----------------------------------------+

Possibilities for extension
----------------------------

* Change the ``phi`` value to see the effect of the angle in the streamline.
* Vary the Reynolds number, or the initial and boundary conditions.
* Make a tridimentional mesh, or even add other features to it, such as sharpen the edges.
* Test higher order elements (e.g., Q2-Q1).

References
----------
[1] Ahmed, S. R., Ramm, G., & Faltin, G. (1984). Some salient features of the time-averaged ground vehicle wake. SAE Transactions, 473-503.
